Camp near Haxall's Landing Va
15th May 1864

My own dear Florence!
	I sent a short note to you yesterday informing you of my arrival at this place. I have enjoyed the best of health and spirits since the campaign opened. We have however had some very hard marches, and very severe fighting. We have been engaged with the enemy every day but one since we started, some of the engagements being quite heavy. Some of our Cavalry occupied the first line of entrenchments about Richmond, and I think we might have taken the City if our troops had but been allowed to advance. General Sheridan's orders however were not to take the City but to frighten the inhabitants as much as possible and also to worry Genl. Lee. We were very successful. We cut all of Genl Lee's Communication with Richmond, and destroyed millions of dollars worth of Rebel stores, captured several trains, burned them & destroyed the Engines, and altogether had quite a gay time. We hadn't any too much to eat, but managed to get along. You fill see by the papers what we did, and if I can get a paper containing the report of the raid I will sent it to you.
	I have not received my appointment as Asst. Asjt. Genl. but have received a commission as captain in the 8th New York Cavalry and have accepted it & have been relieved from duty with the Batty. and ordered to report for duty to the Comdg. Officer of the 8th N.Y. Cavl. I will have a Squadron of Cavalry and the largest in the Regiment, a Squadron consists of two companies and is commanded by the senior officer of the Co's.
	The Regiment is a good one, and I hope to get promotion in it. I never would get any higher up if I took the position of Capt. & A.A. Genl. Now I stand some chance of being a Major some day. It may, and probably will be some time before I get any further advancement, but I can make more of a reputation for myself in the Cavalry than on the Staff.
	I am now going down to the Regt. My horse is waiting for me now, and as night is coming I must be off. I hope I will get a good many letters from you when we get a mail. I am watching anxiously for it every day. Write as soon as you can my darling one, and tell me everything that has transpired since I last heard from you and now my dear good by. I have looked at the locket & your picture many, many times since we started on the campaign, and I love you more every time I see it. And with many Kisses & much love, I am  ever your own,
Jim

Capt. Jas. S. Sayles
8th New York Cavalry
3rd Division Cavalry Corps
Army of the Potomac 
P.S. Poor General Sedgwick is Dead! He was the only man in the Army I would have given my life for, and willingly I would have died for him. His death is the greatest loss that has been sustained by the Army during the War. He was worth more than the rest of the officers of the Whole Army put together. It seems like losing a Father to have poor "Uncle John" die, but he died like a soldier. No cowards were where he was, brave men only went as far as he. But why talk, we cannot bring him back. The whole victory seems dampeneed by the loss of our best and greatest General. God bless his ashes!

Jim

Much love to your Mother & the rest.
J

