Head Quarters 8th N Y. Cav.
July 24th 1864

Miss Florence Lee
Granstead C.E.
	I have the honor of acknowledging the receipt of your note of 19th July. Although any information I have to communicate will necessarily be of a very unpleasant nature, I am very glad to have rec'd your  note and to be able to communicate with any of the friends of Capt. Sayles.
	My Regt. accompanied the command of Genl Wilson on his late raid and on the 23rd June we were engaged with the enemy at "Black & White" station on the Petersburg & Burkville Rrd. The 8th made a charge driving the Rebels about 1/2 mile and was in turn forced back part of the distance during the return the Rebel line advanced very close to the squadron commanded by Jimmy, and he commenced to fire at them with his pistol taking cover behind a tree for the purpose. He was warned by another officer that he should fall back more rapidly or he would be captured, and the line passed on and rallied about 100 feet in rear of the place where the capt was last seen. The above is all that is known except that Jimmy did not come back.
	It is possible that he remained firing at the rebels so long that it was not possible for him to return without a certainty of being shot or he may have been wounded where he has last seen and thus have become unable to return. We report him as "missing" and from his known [illeg] his friends entertain serious apprehensions that something worse than captivity may have befallen him.
	Since that time I have almost daily looked for a letter from our Ast. Surgeon who was left (on the 29th) with wounded and who may have been able to gain intelligence, as surgeons are not held Prisoners of War. We look daily for the release of the Dr.  I shall be happy to communicate to you anything I may hereafter learn concerning his fate. And I must tell you with soldierly frankness that to me any news will be good news for it will prove my fears to be unfounded.
	I have written to Mrs. Sayles at Lansingburg but do not feel sure of having the correct address. If you can communicate with the family of the Capt I presume they will in that way get the first information.
	Between those who knew Jimmy as do you and those who knew the Captain as do I any words of sympathy are useless and you will I trust not misapprehend my feeling if I do not follow custom in this respect. Again let me assure you Miss Lee that I shall be very happy to be at any time able to give you news of your friend and you need have no hesitation in asking for any information in my possession.
Very Respectfully
Your Obed. Svt.
EM Pope
Lieut. Col. 8th N.Y. Cavalry
 