This important Event took place around half past four O'clock Sabbath evening, Sept. 20th 1863. As we were perfectly powerless for resistance, we made the best we could of a bad bargain. The men now came up in squads and demanded our gun blankets, canteens, knives, guns, xc., xc. I dropped my pocket book, knife and Gold pen into my bootleg and hid my gun blanket & canteen while they were occupied with the others. Stuart was stubborn and would not mind me to hide his blanket & canteen, so he lost them both. This was fun for me because he was sulky and would not mind me. After a little while one of the men died, leaving an excellent blanket & canteen so I got the blanket, washed the blood out of it and gave it to Stuart. There was no wrong in this as all of them would be taken away by the secesh. After awhile he got another canteen in the same way. When they came to me and wanted my knife, I offered them a case knife I had found in the road coming from the battlefield. Then supposing it was all I had, afterward let me alone. The officers did not mistreat us in any way but were very nice & polite; but whenever they went away the scalawags would come and pick the men of all the little comforts they could. The Officers asked us many questions, and we asked as many in return. They took away some of our Hospital stores, all our Ambulances, Doctor's Horses, All our fine Band of Musical Instruments, that cost us $600 in [illeg] and all the guns they could find. The men had hid away several fine Enfield Rifles, and after the others were taken away, I advised them to break them so they could not be any use to the Secesh. They did so. General Wheeler on Tuesday sent in his medical director who allowed us one man to cook for 20 and 4 more to wait on them. This was very liberal.

I will now leave off a regular narration and treat of variety. The first duties assigned to me were to go around and take the names of all the wounded, their Co., Rank & Regiment. I found we had 146 then living, beside 19 that were so badly wounded as to die soon after coming in. One of these is shot through the Gullet, so that when he tries to drink, it runs out at the wound, another shot in the right eye and out at the ear. Two others shot through the hip and out through the Privates. Two others directly through the right Leg and yet able to walk unsupported. Many of the balance have fearful wounds in their thighs, and different parts of their bodies that will more than likely cause their death. Where separation takes place, 9 of these have died since [?] the above. Strange as it may seem to you, I can now stand and hold one of a man's legs while the other is cut off and not feel the least particle of that faintish disposition that troubled me so much in former life. Helping the Doctors cut off limbs and bind up wounds is now my daily duty.