Slept pretty well however till roused this morn of the 16th at 4 O'Clock to be ready for March, up & ready, 3rd Brigade goes ahead of us up the mountain, which is now to be climbed as we are told right in the face of the enemy. The signal lights were working most of the night, from our mountain top to the other.
Perhaps I had better describe a Signal Corps. It is a company of men who use a Flag in daytime, made of white cloth, and a dark spot in the center. At night they use a lamp, fixed to a flag staff. These men climb to some high prominent mountain peak, and by means of certain motions made with the Flag or Light, which is read, and understood by the other parties who may stand several miles distant, as easily as they can read the signs of a telegraph. These are used very extensively, as from these mountain peaks, the position and movements of an enemy can be seen and noted to any desired point.
Sun up, and we are still in camp. Perhaps as a rear guard and to assist in case of necessity in getting our cannons and ammunitions up the Mountain. About Eight O'clock we are ordered into line and away for the scene of active strife that is climbing the Mountain. I was correct in my judgement about our delay. We were ordered to assist in getting the wagons up the mountain, whose sides are steepest of any yet seen. But slowly and toilsomely up, up the Poor Mules drag the huge Army wagons and Artillery, sometimes not more than six to ten feet at a time. The Mountain's perpendicular height is not more than 1,000 feet, yet it took Eight hours of the hardest of work to get our Division teams up on the top. The scene was nothing but rugged rough wilds of mountains as far as the eye could reach, Rocks piled on rocks till they seemed to tower to the very Heavens. Finally the top is reached in safety. Rather level, but poor and rocky, several families eking out a miserable existence here for the past 16 to 20 years.
Somebody stole Stuart's quart cup that we made our coffee in. I went to one of these houses and bought another and as much good sweet milk as I could drink for a quarter of a dollar. The woman wanted to give me the cup, saying she wanted to do all she could for the soldiers but I thought they looked too needy and would not take it. Thus, she said she was the mother of eleven children, all born on this miserable hill top. I told her of the beauties of Illinois compared with this rocky region and how much more they could raise with the same labor, etc. etc. She said they would try and get north as soon as quiet was restored to the country. Her husband is used by our men as a guide. Heaven bless them.
Up and away across the Mountain to its eastern side. Here it is almost perpendicular, topped with a margin of rock. Here we stopped and gazed upon the handsomest scene yet presented since in the service. Farm after Farm rose upon the view till lost in the long [?] distance, and shut out by a small mountain called "Pigeon Mountain." From this onward (we are told) commences the great cotton growing region of the state and just beyond this mountain and nearly straight East of us, the Rebs, are entrenched waiting for our approach.
Down we go very steep but quite smoother, large numbers of Pioneers making us a good road. Bottom reached, soil excellent in some places but very poor in others. Camped near an immense spring, drew & issued beef to the men. Cook and ate some supper, pulled some Ragweeds and made a bed of them, used our canteens and boots for a pillow, covered with our oil blanket, slept soundly and sweetly, under the calm blue Heavens till morning.