Here we sat down and rested, ate a little bread & water. Then up and commenced climbing the rugged steeps of the mountain, whose top we reached at half past two, on the morn of the 26th. Tired almost to death, scarcely able to drag our weary bodies another rod, crept into the top of a fallen hickory tree, laid us down on the bare ground and covered with our gun blankets. Would have slept pretty well only it was so chilly, the wind was high and very cold, so we had to turn repeatedly to keep warm. At length the beautiful sun rose in his might and commenced dispelling the chilly air. We now arose and tried to kindle a fire, but our matches were all spoiled by sweating in my vest pocket. Stuart was much vexed at this, as he wanted some warm coffee so badly. This we could not have now. So we for the first time in our lives had to eat fresh beef raw.  This, with some of our sunburnt bread and water, constituted our breakfast. We are now able to eat anything that turns up, even to Tadpole Soup, made of muddy water. We now came to the conclusion that we would climb "High Point," one of the highest peaks of the mountains at whose foot we had slept. It is a mountain of rocks upon the top of the range, and is at least 200 feet higher than the balance of the mountain and is in many places perpendicular. We commenced winding up its fearful sides till at last we came to a pretty good path, so we now soon reached the top. Now a scene of unparalleled grandeur is presented, Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, North Carolina & Mississippi. All in sight of one view, from this dizzy cliff. We are here above the flight of the Buzzards, as they flew beneath us in flocks and at times flew nearly in our faces. Here we could see all over the rout of the past night, and look upon our watchful enemy, now many hundreds of feet below us. Feeling quite safe, I sat down and commenced penning these notes, and Stuart amused himself gathering dwarf chestnuts and sweet birch, when all of a sudden we are startled by the sound of human voices, and looking at our pathway, behold two secesh upon us within ten steps. Providentially both men unarmed, one an old mountaineer, the other a young soldier of the 3rd Confederate regulars. Both parties were scared of us and us of them. They now commenced asking us who we were, where we came from, and how we came there. I told them we were a part of a large body of Gen. Grant's men, who were posed at Cooper's Gap, some few miles south of this point. They then asked how many of them. I said several thousand, but could not tell exactly how many, and that they were in charge of a vast supply train. Part of this was truth, and the balance fabrication. Grant has a large body of men at or near the Gap spoken of and the secesh are trying to keep them from coming down. They now asked us how we got through the (blank) pickets, as they had a strong guard posted this side of that force. I told them I had seen any pickets at all. I now took the offensive and asked them questions to keep them from quizzing us. I asked about the great battle, about their resources, about the state of society, country, productions, xc. Together with the Lay of the mountain, roads and water, whose hands it was in, xc, xc. They strongly advised us to go down on the West side and travel the Summertown road, which they said led direct to Chattanooga, now 16 miles distant, right at the end of the mountain. That this route was perfectly safe, xc. Stuart took this bait readily, "but the old fish" would not bite. So we shouldered up our little traps and started. I asked them if we could not get down in a diagonal to the road spoken of. "Yes," they said, "and strike it about three miles distant." We now started and as soon as I got safely away from them, I told Stuart our only hope of safety was on the top of the mountain and I would go no other way, that those fellows had set a trap for us, which subsequently proved true to the letter, as it proved afterward to be a grand secesh thoroughfare. Stuart did not like this, as he was so tired of the brush and rocks, but we kept directly on the top of the highest part of the mountain, sometimes it was fine, smooth and grassy, at other times it was rocks, piled on rocks, so that the road was fearful to travel. Occasionally we had to cross a small miserable farm. Carefully we avoided all roads, paths & houses till about the middle of the afternoon we began to suffer for water.

	At length we came to a deep Gulch in the Eastern side of the mountain. I told Stuart I felt satisfied there was water in there near the bottom, but it would be a hazardous trip to get it. We consented to risk it and go down, found a fine spring, got all the water we wanted, and again commenced climbing the mountain in a diagonal, or slanting, direction. After a time we came to a path beaten to fine dust with horses' feet. I told Stuart this was quite likely a picket line and the quicker we got away from it the better. So we made good our retreat from its presence but had only gotten about one hundred yards when we heard low talking above us and in front. Judge of our dismay, when we looked and saw a large company of secesh cavalry climbing the mountain in the opposite direction to us, and only a few yards from us. We laid us down in the weeds and grass quietly as scared chickens, and this danger also passed away & we unharmed. Again I thanked God for His deliverance. We must now cross this road, and as it lay at least 50 feet higher than we, and it must be passed at least 100 feet more before we could hide again. As the ground was of a blue slaty formation and very steep it took a great effort to climb it in time, as we did not know what moment another set would come along. When we reached a place where a large tree had torn out of root, I tumbled myself into the hole, nearly exhausted, with the effort of climbing. Here we rested a little and again mounted up the mountain side out of sight of the road.

	We again took up our line of march directly on the mountain top, frequently crossing paths that were much worn, but saw no one to molest us. Nearly night we came to a low place on the mountain, and a considerable farm and a house. Here we concluded to get a little fire and make us some coffee. Disappointed again, for on nearing the house we found we were at the place where the aforementioned "summertown road" came up to the mountain top, and here was a regular pickets stations. Horses had stood here by scores and here were the fresh beds of men. We got away from this place as rapidly as we could. Now had we gone this road as directed we should still have been in Dixie, no doubt of it as the road was dusted to powder at from two to six inches deep. We soon came to a thick clump of underbrush and found an old hollow chestnut stump with one of its sides gone. In this we concluded to make our nest for the night. Commended ourselves to God and laid us down to sleep, and was only awakened by the noise of the birds on Sabbath morning of the 27th and the last Eventful day of our captivity. On lying down at this place Stuart remarked for the first time as following: "Pap, I am sure the Lord is directing us, or we could never have come this far without being captured or shot at." I replied I was confident of it, for this scripture was constantly before my mind "The heart of man deviseth his way, but the Lord directeth his steps."