Slept pretty well however till roused this morn of the 16th at 4 O'Clock to be ready for March, up & ready, 3rd Brigade goes ahead of us up the mountain, which is now to be climbed as we are told right in the face of the enemy. The signal lights were working most of the night, from our mountain top to the other.
Perhaps I had better describe a Signal Corps. It is a company of men who use a Flag in daytime, made of white cloth, and a dark spot in the center. At night they use a lamp, fixed to a flag staff. These men climb to some high prominent mountain peak, and by means of certain motions made with the Flag or Light, which is read, and understood by the other parties who may stand several miles distant, as easily as they can read the signs of a telegraph. These are used very extensively, as from these mountain peaks, the position and movements of an enemy can be seen and noted to any desired point.
Sun up, and we are still in camp. Perhaps as a rear guard and to assist in case of necessity in getting our cannons and ammunitions up the Mountain. About Eight O'clock we are ordered into line and away for the scene of active strife that is climbing the Mountain. I was correct in my judgement about our delay. We were ordered to assist in getting the wagons up the mountain, whose sides are steepest of any yet seen. But slowly and toilsomely up, up the Poor Mules drag the huge Army wagons and Artillery, sometimes not more than six to ten feet at a time. The Mountain's perpendicular height is not more than 1,000 feet, yet it took Eight hours of the hardest of work to get our Division teams up on the top. The scene was nothing but rugged rough wilds of mountains as far as the eye could reach, Rocks piled on rocks till they seemed to tower to the very Heavens. Finally the top is reached in safety. Rather level, but poor and rocky, several families eking out a miserable existence here for the past 16 to 20 years.
Somebody stole Stuart's quart cup that we made our coffee in. I went to one of these houses and bought another and as much good sweet milk as I could drink for a quarter of a dollar. The woman wanted to give me the cup, saying she wanted to do all she could for the soldiers but I thought they looked too needy and would not take it. Thus, she said she was the mother of eleven children, all born on this miserable hill top. I told her of the beauties of Illinois compared with this rocky region and how much more they could raise with the same labor, etc. etc. She said they would try and get north as soon as quiet was restored to the country. Her husband is used by our men as a guide. Heaven bless them.
Up and away across the Mountain to its eastern side. Here it is almost perpendicular, topped with a margin of rock. Here we stopped and gazed upon the handsomest scene yet presented since in the service. Farm after Farm rose upon the view till lost in the long [?] distance, and shut out by a small mountain called "Pigeon Mountain." From this onward (we are told) commences the great cotton growing region of the state and just beyond this mountain and nearly straight East of us, the Rebs, are entrenched waiting for our approach.
Down we go very steep but quite smoother, large numbers of Pioneers making us a good road. Bottom reached, soil excellent in some places but very poor in others. Camped near an immense spring, drew & issued beef to the men. Cook and ate some supper, pulled some Ragweeds and made a bed of them, used our canteens and boots for a pillow, covered with our oil blanket, slept soundly and sweetly, under the calm blue Heavens till morning.
This important Event took place around half past four O'clock Sabbath evening, Sept. 20th 1863. As we were perfectly powerless for resistance, we made the best we could of a bad bargain. The men now came up in squads and demanded our gun blankets, canteens, knives, guns, xc., xc. I dropped my pocket book, knife and Gold pen into my bootleg and hid my gun blanket & canteen while they were occupied with the others. Stuart was stubborn and would not mind me to hide his blanket & canteen, so he lost them both. This was fun for me because he was sulky and would not mind me. After a little while one of the men died, leaving an excellent blanket & canteen so I got the blanket, washed the blood out of it and gave it to Stuart. There was no wrong in this as all of them would be taken away by the secesh. After awhile he got another canteen in the same way. When they came to me and wanted my knife, I offered them a case knife I had found in the road coming from the battlefield. Then supposing it was all I had, afterward let me alone. The officers did not mistreat us in any way but were very nice & polite; but whenever they went away the scalawags would come and pick the men of all the little comforts they could. The Officers asked us many questions, and we asked as many in return. They took away some of our Hospital stores, all our Ambulances, Doctor's Horses, All our fine Band of Musical Instruments, that cost us $600 in [illeg] and all the guns they could find. The men had hid away several fine Enfield Rifles, and after the others were taken away, I advised them to break them so they could not be any use to the Secesh. They did so. General Wheeler on Tuesday sent in his medical director who allowed us one man to cook for 20 and 4 more to wait on them. This was very liberal.

I will now leave off a regular narration and treat of variety. The first duties assigned to me were to go around and take the names of all the wounded, their Co., Rank & Regiment. I found we had 146 then living, beside 19 that were so badly wounded as to die soon after coming in. One of these is shot through the Gullet, so that when he tries to drink, it runs out at the wound, another shot in the right eye and out at the ear. Two others shot through the hip and out through the Privates. Two others directly through the right Leg and yet able to walk unsupported. Many of the balance have fearful wounds in their thighs, and different parts of their bodies that will more than likely cause their death. Where separation takes place, 9 of these have died since [?] the above. Strange as it may seem to you, I can now stand and hold one of a man's legs while the other is cut off and not feel the least particle of that faintish disposition that troubled me so much in former life. Helping the Doctors cut off limbs and bind up wounds is now my daily duty.
Here we sat down and rested, ate a little bread & water. Then up and commenced climbing the rugged steeps of the mountain, whose top we reached at half past two, on the morn of the 26th. Tired almost to death, scarcely able to drag our weary bodies another rod, crept into the top of a fallen hickory tree, laid us down on the bare ground and covered with our gun blankets. Would have slept pretty well only it was so chilly, the wind was high and very cold, so we had to turn repeatedly to keep warm. At length the beautiful sun rose in his might and commenced dispelling the chilly air. We now arose and tried to kindle a fire, but our matches were all spoiled by sweating in my vest pocket. Stuart was much vexed at this, as he wanted some warm coffee so badly. This we could not have now. So we for the first time in our lives had to eat fresh beef raw.  This, with some of our sunburnt bread and water, constituted our breakfast. We are now able to eat anything that turns up, even to Tadpole Soup, made of muddy water. We now came to the conclusion that we would climb "High Point," one of the highest peaks of the mountains at whose foot we had slept. It is a mountain of rocks upon the top of the range, and is at least 200 feet higher than the balance of the mountain and is in many places perpendicular. We commenced winding up its fearful sides till at last we came to a pretty good path, so we now soon reached the top. Now a scene of unparalleled grandeur is presented, Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee, North Carolina & Mississippi. All in sight of one view, from this dizzy cliff. We are here above the flight of the Buzzards, as they flew beneath us in flocks and at times flew nearly in our faces. Here we could see all over the rout of the past night, and look upon our watchful enemy, now many hundreds of feet below us. Feeling quite safe, I sat down and commenced penning these notes, and Stuart amused himself gathering dwarf chestnuts and sweet birch, when all of a sudden we are startled by the sound of human voices, and looking at our pathway, behold two secesh upon us within ten steps. Providentially both men unarmed, one an old mountaineer, the other a young soldier of the 3rd Confederate regulars. Both parties were scared of us and us of them. They now commenced asking us who we were, where we came from, and how we came there. I told them we were a part of a large body of Gen. Grant's men, who were posed at Cooper's Gap, some few miles south of this point. They then asked how many of them. I said several thousand, but could not tell exactly how many, and that they were in charge of a vast supply train. Part of this was truth, and the balance fabrication. Grant has a large body of men at or near the Gap spoken of and the secesh are trying to keep them from coming down. They now asked us how we got through the (blank) pickets, as they had a strong guard posted this side of that force. I told them I had seen any pickets at all. I now took the offensive and asked them questions to keep them from quizzing us. I asked about the great battle, about their resources, about the state of society, country, productions, xc. Together with the Lay of the mountain, roads and water, whose hands it was in, xc, xc. They strongly advised us to go down on the West side and travel the Summertown road, which they said led direct to Chattanooga, now 16 miles distant, right at the end of the mountain. That this route was perfectly safe, xc. Stuart took this bait readily, "but the old fish" would not bite. So we shouldered up our little traps and started. I asked them if we could not get down in a diagonal to the road spoken of. "Yes," they said, "and strike it about three miles distant." We now started and as soon as I got safely away from them, I told Stuart our only hope of safety was on the top of the mountain and I would go no other way, that those fellows had set a trap for us, which subsequently proved true to the letter, as it proved afterward to be a grand secesh thoroughfare. Stuart did not like this, as he was so tired of the brush and rocks, but we kept directly on the top of the highest part of the mountain, sometimes it was fine, smooth and grassy, at other times it was rocks, piled on rocks, so that the road was fearful to travel. Occasionally we had to cross a small miserable farm. Carefully we avoided all roads, paths & houses till about the middle of the afternoon we began to suffer for water.

	At length we came to a deep Gulch in the Eastern side of the mountain. I told Stuart I felt satisfied there was water in there near the bottom, but it would be a hazardous trip to get it. We consented to risk it and go down, found a fine spring, got all the water we wanted, and again commenced climbing the mountain in a diagonal, or slanting, direction. After a time we came to a path beaten to fine dust with horses' feet. I told Stuart this was quite likely a picket line and the quicker we got away from it the better. So we made good our retreat from its presence but had only gotten about one hundred yards when we heard low talking above us and in front. Judge of our dismay, when we looked and saw a large company of secesh cavalry climbing the mountain in the opposite direction to us, and only a few yards from us. We laid us down in the weeds and grass quietly as scared chickens, and this danger also passed away & we unharmed. Again I thanked God for His deliverance. We must now cross this road, and as it lay at least 50 feet higher than we, and it must be passed at least 100 feet more before we could hide again. As the ground was of a blue slaty formation and very steep it took a great effort to climb it in time, as we did not know what moment another set would come along. When we reached a place where a large tree had torn out of root, I tumbled myself into the hole, nearly exhausted, with the effort of climbing. Here we rested a little and again mounted up the mountain side out of sight of the road.

	We again took up our line of march directly on the mountain top, frequently crossing paths that were much worn, but saw no one to molest us. Nearly night we came to a low place on the mountain, and a considerable farm and a house. Here we concluded to get a little fire and make us some coffee. Disappointed again, for on nearing the house we found we were at the place where the aforementioned "summertown road" came up to the mountain top, and here was a regular pickets stations. Horses had stood here by scores and here were the fresh beds of men. We got away from this place as rapidly as we could. Now had we gone this road as directed we should still have been in Dixie, no doubt of it as the road was dusted to powder at from two to six inches deep. We soon came to a thick clump of underbrush and found an old hollow chestnut stump with one of its sides gone. In this we concluded to make our nest for the night. Commended ourselves to God and laid us down to sleep, and was only awakened by the noise of the birds on Sabbath morning of the 27th and the last Eventful day of our captivity. On lying down at this place Stuart remarked for the first time as following: "Pap, I am sure the Lord is directing us, or we could never have come this far without being captured or shot at." I replied I was confident of it, for this scripture was constantly before my mind "The heart of man deviseth his way, but the Lord directeth his steps."

