Wednesday, February 10th, 1864

My own darling Florence!
	I returned from Baltimore on Monday of this week & go to the Army tomorrow morning. I went and had some photographs taken yesterday. Vignette style. They will be finished on Saturday and forwarded to me at the Batty. I found the pictures that had been taken from the Ambrotype but did not like them. I got one however to send to you, but I would prefer that you would not place it in a very conspicuous position. I hope that the new ones will be better. I begin to feel anxious to get back to the Battery and shall feel very much relieved when I get out of this dull place. Lt. Williston is going back with me.
	I have not as yet returned Alice's letters, but shall do so as soon as I get back to the Army.
	I went to the Express Office today to make inquiries about the Bible & Smoking Cap you sent me but could find nothing of them. They may however have been sent down to the Army & I will get them there. I hope to receive a letter from you when I reach the Batty and right glad will I be to hear from my very very dear Florence.
	Has your Father returned yet? If so has anything been said to him about the relations existing between yourself & I? And what did he say? I hope you have told your Mother of our engagement. As I should not be satisfied to have anything clandestine about the matter. I am desirous that your Parents should not be deceived in anything. Your Mother has been so very kind to me that I feel like placing the utmost confidence in her.
	As I have an engagement this evening with some Army friends you must excuse me if I do not write a very long letter. Though short I hope it will be sweet to you.
Remember me to Your Mother & the rest of my friends. And write me very often.
I remain
Your own affectionate
Jim
Camp near Haxall's Landing Va
15th May 1864

My own dear Florence!
	I sent a short note to you yesterday informing you of my arrival at this place. I have enjoyed the best of health and spirits since the campaign opened. We have however had some very hard marches, and very severe fighting. We have been engaged with the enemy every day but one since we started, some of the engagements being quite heavy. Some of our Cavalry occupied the first line of entrenchments about Richmond, and I think we might have taken the City if our troops had but been allowed to advance. General Sheridan's orders however were not to take the City but to frighten the inhabitants as much as possible and also to worry Genl. Lee. We were very successful. We cut all of Genl Lee's Communication with Richmond, and destroyed millions of dollars worth of Rebel stores, captured several trains, burned them & destroyed the Engines, and altogether had quite a gay time. We hadn't any too much to eat, but managed to get along. You fill see by the papers what we did, and if I can get a paper containing the report of the raid I will sent it to you.
	I have not received my appointment as Asst. Asjt. Genl. but have received a commission as captain in the 8th New York Cavalry and have accepted it & have been relieved from duty with the Batty. and ordered to report for duty to the Comdg. Officer of the 8th N.Y. Cavl. I will have a Squadron of Cavalry and the largest in the Regiment, a Squadron consists of two companies and is commanded by the senior officer of the Co's.
	The Regiment is a good one, and I hope to get promotion in it. I never would get any higher up if I took the position of Capt. & A.A. Genl. Now I stand some chance of being a Major some day. It may, and probably will be some time before I get any further advancement, but I can make more of a reputation for myself in the Cavalry than on the Staff.
	I am now going down to the Regt. My horse is waiting for me now, and as night is coming I must be off. I hope I will get a good many letters from you when we get a mail. I am watching anxiously for it every day. Write as soon as you can my darling one, and tell me everything that has transpired since I last heard from you and now my dear good by. I have looked at the locket & your picture many, many times since we started on the campaign, and I love you more every time I see it. And with many Kisses & much love, I am  ever your own,
Jim

Capt. Jas. S. Sayles
8th New York Cavalry
3rd Division Cavalry Corps
Army of the Potomac 
P.S. Poor General Sedgwick is Dead! He was the only man in the Army I would have given my life for, and willingly I would have died for him. His death is the greatest loss that has been sustained by the Army during the War. He was worth more than the rest of the officers of the Whole Army put together. It seems like losing a Father to have poor "Uncle John" die, but he died like a soldier. No cowards were where he was, brave men only went as far as he. But why talk, we cannot bring him back. The whole victory seems dampeneed by the loss of our best and greatest General. God bless his ashes!

Jim

Much love to your Mother & the rest.
J


Head Quarters 8th N Y. Cav.
July 24th 1864

Miss Florence Lee
Granstead C.E.
	I have the honor of acknowledging the receipt of your note of 19th July. Although any information I have to communicate will necessarily be of a very unpleasant nature, I am very glad to have rec'd your  note and to be able to communicate with any of the friends of Capt. Sayles.
	My Regt. accompanied the command of Genl Wilson on his late raid and on the 23rd June we were engaged with the enemy at "Black & White" station on the Petersburg & Burkville Rrd. The 8th made a charge driving the Rebels about 1/2 mile and was in turn forced back part of the distance during the return the Rebel line advanced very close to the squadron commanded by Jimmy, and he commenced to fire at them with his pistol taking cover behind a tree for the purpose. He was warned by another officer that he should fall back more rapidly or he would be captured, and the line passed on and rallied about 100 feet in rear of the place where the capt was last seen. The above is all that is known except that Jimmy did not come back.
	It is possible that he remained firing at the rebels so long that it was not possible for him to return without a certainty of being shot or he may have been wounded where he has last seen and thus have become unable to return. We report him as "missing" and from his known [illeg] his friends entertain serious apprehensions that something worse than captivity may have befallen him.
	Since that time I have almost daily looked for a letter from our Ast. Surgeon who was left (on the 29th) with wounded and who may have been able to gain intelligence, as surgeons are not held Prisoners of War. We look daily for the release of the Dr.  I shall be happy to communicate to you anything I may hereafter learn concerning his fate. And I must tell you with soldierly frankness that to me any news will be good news for it will prove my fears to be unfounded.
	I have written to Mrs. Sayles at Lansingburg but do not feel sure of having the correct address. If you can communicate with the family of the Capt I presume they will in that way get the first information.
	Between those who knew Jimmy as do you and those who knew the Captain as do I any words of sympathy are useless and you will I trust not misapprehend my feeling if I do not follow custom in this respect. Again let me assure you Miss Lee that I shall be very happy to be at any time able to give you news of your friend and you need have no hesitation in asking for any information in my possession.
Very Respectfully
Your Obed. Svt.
EM Pope
Lieut. Col. 8th N.Y. Cavalry
 

