Hampton, Va. July 13th, 1863 

Dear Mother; We are now awaiting steamers to transport the troops to Portsmouth. The Division reached here this morning, and are now going into camp. We will probably be delayed here several days. It is now certain that this Division is to garrison Portsmouth for the rest of the summer, a most disgusting prospect, and a fate from which I hope to escape. Corcoran and his Michies will be sent to Washington, where, it is to be hoped, they will be placed in the front ranks. The weather is delightful, but very hot, and there is the greatest abundance of blackberries. I had a letter from Mande a few days ago. She wrote from Andover, where she was having great times, riding the pony, &c. Hampton, before the war, was a delightful little town, very aristocratic, with broad streets, fine brick mansions, and noble shade trees. The Episcopal Church was the oldest, and certainly the most aristocratic, in the United States. The inhabitants were all F.F.Vs [First Family of Virginia] and looked down upon the rest of mankind. They would hardly associate with the officers at Fort Monroe and their families, whom they considered as low and parvenu. Soon after the war commenced, John Magruder, in one of his drunken fits most probably, laid the town in ashes, and the destruction wrought by him, thorough as it was, has been completed by the large army of McClellan which passed through last year, and by the negroes who have demolished the old blackened ruins of Magruder to build their own little shanties along side. The place is now a negro colony, not a white inhabitant remains; only the walls of the old church are left standing; the church yard walls is broken down, the graves and tombstones are defaced and mutilated, and a company of cavalry are grazing their horses within the old church yard, where repose the ashes of the most illustrious of VirginiaÕs families. Such an utter desolation have two years of war made in this once flourishing town. The whole peninsula, in fact, was desolated by McClellan's army. From the White House to Hampton, scarcely a pig, chicken, cow, horse, or living thing can be seen. The fences are all gone, except here and there where they have been rebuilt and a scanty crop put in, and the houses, such as are not destroyed, look dilapidated and ruinous. It is very [different] in King William and Hanover Counties, which we traversed in the expedition to burn the R.R. bridge over the South Anna. These counties have hitherto escaped the visitations of either army, and with them all is flourishing. I saw splendid crops of wheat, which they were just harvesting. At one place there were between 500 and 600 acres of land in wheat, and such a crops I never saw before. We are anxiously awaiting news from Maryland. When once the great armies of the rebellion are destroyed, they will be no further trouble. So you may rest easy in regard to my safety for the remainder of the summer. We have the inglorious and useless part of garrison troops to play, a fine commentary on the wisdom of those in power, who retain the only fighting division in the Dept. to rust in sloth and idleness, while they send raw end inexperienced levies to the battle field. I hope you will write often. I hope to see you this fall or winter. As soon as active operations and all chance of doing something, are over, I shall apply for a short leave of absence. Good bye. Your affectionate son Hazard Stevens Give my respects to the Prof. and Mrs. Bache.
