Clifton, Va Sept. 18, 1864 Dear Mother; Punch would find rare pickings in the army. The everyday jokes and incidents of campaign life are rich enough. The other day in a cavalry charge the enemy broke and a rebel soldier was chased into a fence corner whence he could not escape. "I surrender! I surrender!" he cried to the pursuing trooper. "What do you think of the old flag now!" replied the soldier aiming a cut at him. The men in the ranks get off many a good thing. It is curious to see what a zest some of them take in man hunting, skirmishing, scouting and the like. They are as much pleased when they bring down an opponent as a successful sportsman with his bird. Everything has remained in its usual quiet since I last wrote. We have a most beautiful little camp for Headquarters, and are quite comfortable. I have gone to the length of building a stable for my horses, and if we don't move soon shall think about building a chimney for my tent. We have plenty of grapes peaches and apples and I found some sweet cider a few days ago. So you see we are very well off, as fare as physical comfort goes. General Grant M.L. is here, which looks like action. Probably to see what is doing and whether any force can be spared to reinforce his army at Petersburg. As for McClellan, he will make a worse failure as a politician than as a soldier. I think his army strength is all gone. Few are left of his old army and they have changed in their feelings towards him to some extent. Nowadays they are making everybody Brevent Major General. Here is Amory for one, a contemptible fellow, half traitor. A General Kelly, who has been almost invariably beaten, telegraphs "I have beaten Imboden, cut [off] Johnson, and am now on the heels of their main army", all false, and behold! He is made brevent Major Gen'l. Such a miserable lot of scamps as seem to control affairs in this republic. I am almost tempted to go for MacClellan, a miserable conceited, cold blooded puppy, one of those who are all ambition without the brains and daring that make ambition glorious. And "let I dare not, wait upon I would" I hope a Grant or Sherman will be our president some time, a straight forward man who will purge the sinks of corruption at Washington. Give my love to the girls and write soon. Your Affectionate son Hazard Stevens


