Six Miles East of Appomattox Court House, Va April 10th 1865 Dear Mother; There is no longer an Army of Northern Virginia. Lee surrendered the remainder of his army yesterday afternoon, about 20,000 men, I believe. The last hope of the Rebellion is extinguished. They are and feel themselves to be a whipped people. From Richmond and Petersburg, the two parts of Lee's army, cut in two by the charge of the 6th Corps on the 2d inst, retreated westward and effected a junction at Amelia C.H. Grant pursued with his army spread out on parallel roads. Sheridan with the cavalry kept on Lee's left, and cut him off from retreating South to Danville. Lee's arrivals were in poor condition. His trains moved slowly and delayed his army which depended for rations on these trains. So Grant was enabled to overtake him, and pass Sheridan and two Corps, the 5th & 24th, around his flank and in position in his front while the rest of our forces pursued him in war. By the map, you will see a road from Farmville to Appomattox C.H., north of the Appomattox River. Lee took the road but found Sheridan posted at Appomattox C.H. in force, while the 2d and 6th Corps were thundering in his rear. Gordon's Corps, formerly Stonewall Jackson's, at once attacked the cavalry, and infantry (24th & 5th Corps) but were beautifully whipped. Lee then had no alternatives but to surrender, or have his army crushed between our columns. So he surrendered like a sensible man. So ends the Confederacy. Grant will parole them and let them go home. Thus in a campaign of 7 days, the rebel army which has held us in check for four years, was annihilated, not a fraction left. We find wagons and artillery scattered everywhere through the woods. At our Provost Marshal, Capt. McGinley was riding along a negro came up and said "Are you Abram Linkun?" "No!" "Are you Gen. Grant then?" "No!" "Well, you would like to see them guns anyhow, would'nt [sic] you?" and immediately showed him 15 guns, pieces of artillery hid in the woods. As we went through Farmville, you could see men throwing Rebel money into the streets by basketsful. What a glorious end to this war! I expect to be home for good in a few months now. No more killing. No more going under artillery and musketry fire, and shouting yourself hoarse, trying to push up the men. Our fights are over, and we can now enjoy the fruit of our labors. You can't imagine what a time we had last night. Gen. Getty and all the generals rode around through the army, and such cheering I never heard. One regiment the 61st Penn. cheered me, the first time I have been cheered since the Highlanders. My new horse almost threw me. She was very much frightened. All the artillery fired salutes. Such a roar of guns, more than a great battle. Every body was mad with joy. All those who had whiskely [sic] drank it. I don't believe there was a sober General in our Corps last night, and the staff were not far behind. Now we are getting up a 6th Corps Club, and talking of Mexico. We don't know which to clean out first, Canada or Mexico, but rather think we will take both at once. Seriously tho', both armies would unite in a moment against any foreign nation. First however, we are all going home to abuse the stay-at-homes, and slinks [?] who would not defend their country. Somebody will be whipped about five minutes after our fellows reach home. Give my love to the girls and write soon. Our Corps has gained great reputation in the army for their fighting. Write soon. Direct via Petersburg. Your affectionate son Hazard Stevens
