Near Chain Bridge Virginia Sept. 15, 1861 Dear Mother; Since I last wrote I have been very busy. We occupy an exposed point, our pickets are constantly in hot water with the enemy's, Gen. Smith stampedes and we are continually in a state of alarm. Night before last we had a grand stampede, the troops were all under arms for some time and occupying position all about, strong working parties were busily digging in the trenches until after midnight and the troops were finally ordered to lie down on the ground besides the trenches with their arms in order to be ready at a moments notice; yet no enemy made his appearance, and we had our trouble for our pains. I say "we" for convenience, but I sleep in a house and don't wake up for any alarms. I have been in two small fights since my arrival. They didn't either amount to much, so I wasn't much frightened. The shells and rifle cannon they talk so much about don't amount to much. I was exposed to their fire and take this opportunity to expose them. If they hit a man they may hurt him but I saw 30, or 40, of them go way over the heads of our troops and burst 200 yards beyond them. Whenever a shell would come the men and officers would drop on their hands and feet and "sing small". They were just as safe standing up, but didn't have sense enough to see it. I will write you more fully soon. Love to the children & c. Your affectionate son Hazard Stevens

Hampton, Va. July 13th, 1863 

Dear Mother; We are now awaiting steamers to transport the troops to Portsmouth. The Division reached here this morning, and are now going into camp. We will probably be delayed here several days. It is now certain that this Division is to garrison Portsmouth for the rest of the summer, a most disgusting prospect, and a fate from which I hope to escape. Corcoran and his Michies will be sent to Washington, where, it is to be hoped, they will be placed in the front ranks. The weather is delightful, but very hot, and there is the greatest abundance of blackberries. I had a letter from Mande a few days ago. She wrote from Andover, where she was having great times, riding the pony, &c. Hampton, before the war, was a delightful little town, very aristocratic, with broad streets, fine brick mansions, and noble shade trees. The Episcopal Church was the oldest, and certainly the most aristocratic, in the United States. The inhabitants were all F.F.Vs [First Family of Virginia] and looked down upon the rest of mankind. They would hardly associate with the officers at Fort Monroe and their families, whom they considered as low and parvenu. Soon after the war commenced, John Magruder, in one of his drunken fits most probably, laid the town in ashes, and the destruction wrought by him, thorough as it was, has been completed by the large army of McClellan which passed through last year, and by the negroes who have demolished the old blackened ruins of Magruder to build their own little shanties along side. The place is now a negro colony, not a white inhabitant remains; only the walls of the old church are left standing; the church yard walls is broken down, the graves and tombstones are defaced and mutilated, and a company of cavalry are grazing their horses within the old church yard, where repose the ashes of the most illustrious of VirginiaÕs families. Such an utter desolation have two years of war made in this once flourishing town. The whole peninsula, in fact, was desolated by McClellan's army. From the White House to Hampton, scarcely a pig, chicken, cow, horse, or living thing can be seen. The fences are all gone, except here and there where they have been rebuilt and a scanty crop put in, and the houses, such as are not destroyed, look dilapidated and ruinous. It is very [different] in King William and Hanover Counties, which we traversed in the expedition to burn the R.R. bridge over the South Anna. These counties have hitherto escaped the visitations of either army, and with them all is flourishing. I saw splendid crops of wheat, which they were just harvesting. At one place there were between 500 and 600 acres of land in wheat, and such a crops I never saw before. We are anxiously awaiting news from Maryland. When once the great armies of the rebellion are destroyed, they will be no further trouble. So you may rest easy in regard to my safety for the remainder of the summer. We have the inglorious and useless part of garrison troops to play, a fine commentary on the wisdom of those in power, who retain the only fighting division in the Dept. to rust in sloth and idleness, while they send raw end inexperienced levies to the battle field. I hope you will write often. I hope to see you this fall or winter. As soon as active operations and all chance of doing something, are over, I shall apply for a short leave of absence. Good bye. Your affectionate son Hazard Stevens Give my respects to the Prof. and Mrs. Bache.

Clifton, Va Sept. 18, 1864 Dear Mother; Punch would find rare pickings in the army. The everyday jokes and incidents of campaign life are rich enough. The other day in a cavalry charge the enemy broke and a rebel soldier was chased into a fence corner whence he could not escape. "I surrender! I surrender!" he cried to the pursuing trooper. "What do you think of the old flag now!" replied the soldier aiming a cut at him. The men in the ranks get off many a good thing. It is curious to see what a zest some of them take in man hunting, skirmishing, scouting and the like. They are as much pleased when they bring down an opponent as a successful sportsman with his bird. Everything has remained in its usual quiet since I last wrote. We have a most beautiful little camp for Headquarters, and are quite comfortable. I have gone to the length of building a stable for my horses, and if we don't move soon shall think about building a chimney for my tent. We have plenty of grapes peaches and apples and I found some sweet cider a few days ago. So you see we are very well off, as fare as physical comfort goes. General Grant M.L. is here, which looks like action. Probably to see what is doing and whether any force can be spared to reinforce his army at Petersburg. As for McClellan, he will make a worse failure as a politician than as a soldier. I think his army strength is all gone. Few are left of his old army and they have changed in their feelings towards him to some extent. Nowadays they are making everybody Brevent Major General. Here is Amory for one, a contemptible fellow, half traitor. A General Kelly, who has been almost invariably beaten, telegraphs "I have beaten Imboden, cut [off] Johnson, and am now on the heels of their main army", all false, and behold! He is made brevent Major Gen'l. Such a miserable lot of scamps as seem to control affairs in this republic. I am almost tempted to go for MacClellan, a miserable conceited, cold blooded puppy, one of those who are all ambition without the brains and daring that make ambition glorious. And "let I dare not, wait upon I would" I hope a Grant or Sherman will be our president some time, a straight forward man who will purge the sinks of corruption at Washington. Give my love to the girls and write soon. Your Affectionate son Hazard Stevens



Six Miles East of Appomattox Court House, Va April 10th 1865 Dear Mother; There is no longer an Army of Northern Virginia. Lee surrendered the remainder of his army yesterday afternoon, about 20,000 men, I believe. The last hope of the Rebellion is extinguished. They are and feel themselves to be a whipped people. From Richmond and Petersburg, the two parts of Lee's army, cut in two by the charge of the 6th Corps on the 2d inst, retreated westward and effected a junction at Amelia C.H. Grant pursued with his army spread out on parallel roads. Sheridan with the cavalry kept on Lee's left, and cut him off from retreating South to Danville. Lee's arrivals were in poor condition. His trains moved slowly and delayed his army which depended for rations on these trains. So Grant was enabled to overtake him, and pass Sheridan and two Corps, the 5th & 24th, around his flank and in position in his front while the rest of our forces pursued him in war. By the map, you will see a road from Farmville to Appomattox C.H., north of the Appomattox River. Lee took the road but found Sheridan posted at Appomattox C.H. in force, while the 2d and 6th Corps were thundering in his rear. Gordon's Corps, formerly Stonewall Jackson's, at once attacked the cavalry, and infantry (24th & 5th Corps) but were beautifully whipped. Lee then had no alternatives but to surrender, or have his army crushed between our columns. So he surrendered like a sensible man. So ends the Confederacy. Grant will parole them and let them go home. Thus in a campaign of 7 days, the rebel army which has held us in check for four years, was annihilated, not a fraction left. We find wagons and artillery scattered everywhere through the woods. At our Provost Marshal, Capt. McGinley was riding along a negro came up and said "Are you Abram Linkun?" "No!" "Are you Gen. Grant then?" "No!" "Well, you would like to see them guns anyhow, would'nt [sic] you?" and immediately showed him 15 guns, pieces of artillery hid in the woods. As we went through Farmville, you could see men throwing Rebel money into the streets by basketsful. What a glorious end to this war! I expect to be home for good in a few months now. No more killing. No more going under artillery and musketry fire, and shouting yourself hoarse, trying to push up the men. Our fights are over, and we can now enjoy the fruit of our labors. You can't imagine what a time we had last night. Gen. Getty and all the generals rode around through the army, and such cheering I never heard. One regiment the 61st Penn. cheered me, the first time I have been cheered since the Highlanders. My new horse almost threw me. She was very much frightened. All the artillery fired salutes. Such a roar of guns, more than a great battle. Every body was mad with joy. All those who had whiskely [sic] drank it. I don't believe there was a sober General in our Corps last night, and the staff were not far behind. Now we are getting up a 6th Corps Club, and talking of Mexico. We don't know which to clean out first, Canada or Mexico, but rather think we will take both at once. Seriously tho', both armies would unite in a moment against any foreign nation. First however, we are all going home to abuse the stay-at-homes, and slinks [?] who would not defend their country. Somebody will be whipped about five minutes after our fellows reach home. Give my love to the girls and write soon. Our Corps has gained great reputation in the army for their fighting. Write soon. Direct via Petersburg. Your affectionate son Hazard Stevens


